JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
most wanted
fugitive from November's Paris
terrorist attack
is captured in a Brussels
shoot-out.
Then: The European Union reaches
a deal with
Turkey to stem the flow of
refugees coming
in by the thousands each day.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to
analyze a full week of political
news.
And how a new feature film
grapples with the
moral dilemmas of drone warfare.
GAVIN HOOD, Director, "Eye in
the Sky": The
tiny drone flies through the
window or a door,
and detonates right by your
temple, or it
blows a little dose of anthrax
in your nose
as it flies by. It's very
creepy, but there's
no stopping it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: A raid, a
shoot-out, and five
people in custody, including the
main suspect
in the Paris attacks, that chain
of events
played out late today in
Brussels, Belgium.
And when it was over, police
proclaimed success
after a four-month manhunt.
The crack of gunfire in the
city's Molenbeek
neighborhood ended in the arrest
that police
had long sought; 26-year-old
Salah Abdeslam
was captured alive, but wounded
in the leg
during the shoot-out with
police.
Belgium's prime minister made
the formal announcement.
CHARLES MICHEL, Belgian Prime
Minister (through
translator): I can tell you that
we have arrested
Abdeslam as part of an operation
linked to
an investigation on the attacks
in Paris.
And I want to warmly thank our
security forces.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile,
helmeted police
with riot shields cordoned off
the area. And,
as darkness fell, at least one
explosion lit
up the site.
French investigators say
Abdeslam was one
of several attackers who carried
out the Paris
rampage last November, targeting
a rock concert,
cafes, and a stadium; 130 people
died that
night, and hundreds more were
wounded. It
is believed that Abdeslam fled
Paris, slipped
through a dragnet and escaped
back to Brussels,
where the attacks had been
planned.
The Islamic State group claimed
responsibility
for the massacre. Most of the
other suspects,
including one of Abdeslam's
brothers, died
that night or were killed later
by police.
Today's raid gained momentum
after Belgian
authorities raided this
apartment in another
Brussels neighborhood on Tuesday
and found
Abdeslam's fingerprints.
A man believed to be one of his
accomplices
was killed there. Two others
fled the scene,
one of whom now appears to have
been Abdeslam
himself.
French President Francois
Hollande said this
evening that the investigation
of the Paris
attacks is not over. He said
there will be
more arrests. We will get the
White House
perspective on all of this right
after the
news summary.
The day's other major story also
comes from
Brussels, where European leaders
sealed a
deal with Turkey to stem the
tide of migrants.
It calls for sending back
thousands who reach
Greece. The Turkish coast guard
also moved
aggressively today to block
migrant sailings,
nearly swamping one boat on the
Aegean Sea.
In all, some 1,700 people were
detained. We
will have a full report later in
the program.
The corruption crisis that has
engulfed Brazil's
government deepened again today.
Riot police
in Sao Paulo used water cannon
and pepper
spray to roust protesters ahead
of a planned
rally by government supporters.
The protesters
are demanding the ouster of
President Dilma
Rousseff.
And in Iraq, thousands marched
on Baghdad's
government center, demanding
reforms to end
corruption there. Riot police
stood aside
and let the demonstrators cut
through a razor
wire fence to get closer to the
fortified
Green Zone. There, they put up
tents and began
a sit-in.
PROTESTER (through translator):
We are staying
here and will not pull back. We
will stay
here, leaving our families and
mothers until
the corrupters leave. Are you
listening to
me? That's it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The protesters
are responding
to a call for action from
Muqtada al-Sadr,
an influential Shiite cleric.
Back in this country, a crack
appeared in
Senate Republican opposition to
voting on
Merrick Garland, the president's
Supreme Court
nominee. Illinois Senator Mark
Kirk said today
that he's breaking with his
party leaders.
In his words, "It's just man up
and vote."
Kirk faces a difficult
reelection fight in
a Democratic-leaning state.
Wall Street kept its rally going
today. The
Dow Jones industrial average
gained 120 points
to close above 17600. The Nasdaq
rose 20 points,
and the S&P 500 added nine. The
Dow and the
S&P are now back in positive
territory for
the year.
And for the first time, a woman
has been tapped
to lead a U.S. military combat
command. The
Pentagon says that President
Obama will nominate
Air Force General Lori Robinson
to lead the
U.S. Northern Command. It
oversees all military
activities in North America.
Robinson is currently
head of U.S. air forces in the
Pacific.
And, finally, if you had
Michigan State winning
it all in college basketball's
march madness,
your bracket is toast. A 15th
seed, Middle
Tennessee State, shocked the
second-seeded
Spartans today 90-81, and that
was in the
first round. It's one of the
biggest upsets
since they started seeding teams
in 1985.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
White House
National Security Adviser Susan
Rice on the
Paris attacker and the
president's upcoming
visit to Cuba; what the European
Union migrant
deal means for the migrants
themselves; Mark
Shields and David Brooks analyze
the stop
Trump movement; a new movie on
the complications
of drone warfare; and much more.
President Obama was briefed on
today's arrests
in Brussels and spoke with the
French and
Belgian leaders by phone.
We get the latest on that and
look ahead to
the president's historic trip to
Cuba with
National Security Adviser Susan
Rice.
Welcome back to the program.
Susan Rice, first of all, tell
us about the
U.S. role in helping the French
and Belgian
authorities locate these people
in Brussels.
SUSAN RICE, U.S. National
Security Adviser:
Well, Judy, it needs to be said,
as the president
did to the prime minister of
Belgium and the
president of France, it's really
the services
of Belgium and France that
deserve the lion's
share of the credit here. And
congratulations
on a well-executed operation.
This is their
day.
And, indeed, since the Paris
attacks, actually,
well before the Paris attacks,
but especially
after the Paris attacks, the
United States
has stepped up its intelligence
and law enforcement
cooperation with our European
partners, the
French in particular, but many
other Europeans
as well.
And we are sharing information
and supporting
each other in ways that are
unprecedented.
But I can't get into think any
specifics about
this operation, and it's an
ongoing investigation,
as you understand.
But I do think it's important to
give the
Belgian authorities and the
French authorities
their due today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much of a
threat from the
Islamic State does this take off
the table?
What does the U.S. now have less
to worry
about as a result of this, would
you say?
SUSAN RICE: Well, Judy,
obviously, this is
a good development, but it is
far from a turning
point in the fight against ISIL.
We are engaged in a
multifaceted, comprehensive
campaign to degrade and defeat
ISIL, and we
have seen important progress,
but by no means
can we look at today and say we
have turned
a corner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I want to
ask you about
that, because the president told
Jeffrey Goldberg
in a series of interviews with
"The Atlantic"
that he doesn't see ISIS, or
ISIL, as an existential
threat to the United States.
And Jeffrey Goldberg reported
that the president
has said to the White House
staff that more
people have to worry about falls
in bathtubs
and car accidents and gun
shootings than they
do terrorists. So, how much
should Americans
fear ISIS?
SUSAN RICE: Well, what is an
existential threat,
Judy? That's something that can
literally
destroy our nation as we know
it, physically
and otherwise. So, I think
that's a very valid
statement.
But that doesn't mean ISIL can't
conduct attacks
and do Americans harm, whether
abroad or at
home. And, obviously, we have
every interest
and the president is fully
committed to doing
all that we possibly can to
defeat ISIL, because,
like al-Qaida, it is a threat
that we must
guard against and that it can do
real harm
to Americans and our allies, not
to mention
the countries in which it is
rampaging.
So, we have every interest in
putting all
of our efforts and that of our
coalition partners
behind the fight against ISIL.
And Americans
should take that threat
seriously, but we
also shouldn't overblow it and
turn ISIL into
the equivalent of the Soviet
Union at the
height of the Cold War. That is
not a fair
comparison.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me turn the
corner to Cuba.
The president is going to make
this historic
visit this weekend, the first
visit by an
American president there since
Calvin Coolidge.
How close does President Obama
want relations
to be between the U.S. and Cuba?
SUSAN RICE: Well, Judy, it's not
about how
close.
I mean, obviously, this is a
very new diplomatic
relationship. It's just begun in
the last
several months. Normalization is
at the early
stages, and it's going to take
time. There
are real differences that remain
between our
governments and our systems.
And so we're not going to be
best friends.
That's not what we're talking
about here.
But it is about moving out of a
50-year failed
policy that yielded no change
towards an era
of engagement, which we're
confident, over
time, will open up society in
Cuba.
But at the people-to-people
level, we think
that there is a natural affinity
between the
people of Cuba and the people of
the United
States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking of
what you
just mentioned, what do you say
who oppose
this kind of normalization with
Cuba who say
what's happened here is that the
U.S. has
given in, has made concessions
on things like
travel and trade, while the
Cubans have done
almost nothing when it comes to
human rights
and democracy, in other words,
that the U.S.
has done more giving than the
Cubans?
SUSAN RICE: Well, Judy, what we
would say
is, first of all, it is not a
concession to
allow U.S. businesses to operate
and compete
in Cuba, when our partners have
been doing
so for many years.
It's not a concession for
Americans to travel.
That is in our interest. Our
view is, rather
than continue to do the same
failed thing
over and over again and hope for
a different
result, instead, we should do
what has worked
in so many other contexts around
the world,
which is to give the Cuban
people the opportunity
to engage with American
ingenuity, American
entrepreneurs, American civil
society leaders,
and to see through that
engagement a future
that they only -- only
themselves can bring
to Cuba over the long term.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama's
national
security adviser, Susan Rice, we
thank you.
SUSAN RICE: It's good to be with
you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We return to the
major European-Turkish
agreement on how to cope with
the refugee
crisis.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Under the deal
agreed to today,
Turkey will take back Syrian
refugees now
in Greece, Europe will accept
some refugees
now in Turkey, and Turkey will
get financial
and closer travel and political
ties to Europe.
Joining us from Brussels,
Matthew Karnitschnig,
chief Europe correspondent for
Politico, and
in Copenhagen, the "NewsHour"'s
Malcolm Brabant.
Welcome to both of you.
Matthew, let me start with you.
So, for Europe, the idea is
fewer refugees
and a more orderly process. How
is this supposed
to work? Fill in the details a
bit.
MATTHEW KARNITSCHNIG, Politico:
Well, at the
core of this deal is this
mechanism that you
mentioned whereby the Turks will
take back
all Syrian refugees who arrive
in Greece,
and, in return, the Europeans
would take a
certain number, one to one,
essentially, of
the Syrian refugees now in
Turkey.
The idea is this would undermine
the smugglers'
trade, which is responsible for
bringing all
of these refugees in rubber
rafts and so forth
to Greece at the moment, and
Angela Merkel
and the other European leaders
hope that this
will convince Syrians and other
migrants not
to come to Europe in the first
place, that
they will see that it's
pointless to try to
come with the smugglers because
they will
automatically be sent back.
JEFFREY BROWN: But, Malcolm, of
course, sending
these back, all those people
stranded in Greece,
raises enormous logistical and
legal challenges,
right?
We have already had a lot of
criticism on
the legal side from Amnesty
International,
the U.N. High Commissioner for
Refugees. How
hard will this be to do?
MALCOLM BRABANT: This is going
to be extremely
difficult to implement. It's
going to be a
logistical nightmare.
Trying to deport thousands of
people is going
to be a huge task that is going
to create
some really ugly scenes, because
you have
got these people who have spent
thousands
of dollars getting to Greece
suddenly facing
the prospect of being sent back.
They're not going to meekly and
mildly. There
are going to be fights and
struggles going
on in these various places. Now,
what's supposed
to also happen is that these
people are supposed
to also have their appeals for
asylum being
fast-tracked.
And Greece has got a dreadful
reputation for
trying to fast-track anything.
Trying to determine
whether or not somebody is a
serious asylum-seeker,
a justified asylum-seeker, is
something that's
supposed to happen almost
instantly, especially
as the UNHCR, for example, is
saying that
everybody needs to have the
right to appeal.
So, I foresee chaos in the Greek
islands.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so,
Matthew, are there
any plans in the details what
more Europe
is planning to do to make the
process work
better? And also explain to what
is -- from
the Turkish side, what's in it
for them?
MATTHEW KARNITSCHNIG: Well, the
Europeans
are saying now they recognize,
of course,
that Greece, which is in the
midst of this
economic crisis, really an
economic depression,
is not going to be able to
handle this problem
alone. They don't have the
administration
to deal with this many refugees.
So, the Brussels bureaucrats, if
you will,
are saying they will send down
to up to 4,000
officials, judges, interpreters,
and so forth
to deal with these processes
that they need
to introduce here in terms of
dealing with
the asylum applicants and
ensuring that they
get a fair review of their case.
But to think that this is going
to happen
within 48 hours, because they're
also saying
that they want to introduce this
program starting
on Sunday, is somewhat
ambitious, to put it
mildly. So, there is a lot of
skepticism here
in Brussels and elsewhere in
Europe about
whether this plan is going to be
dead on arrival,
essentially.
What's in it for the Turks is
that the Turks
get visa liberalization, as
they're calling
it, which means that Turkish
citizens, if
they meet a number of -- if
Turkey meets a
number of requirements in the
coming months,
will be able to travel into the
E.U. without
visas, which would be a huge
political win
for Turkish President Erdogan,
who has really
been trying to show to his
people that, despite
all of the criticism of Turkey
and his rule
in Turkey, his increasingly
authoritarian
rule, many people say, that they
are still
part of the West, that the West
still accepts
them and takes them seriously.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, Malcolm,
you have reported
from Turkey. You have been
talking to people
there. Well, is it likely that
this would
discourage people from making
the trip at
this point, and what are you
hearing from
Turkey now?
MALCOLM BRABANT: Well, I was
talking to a
refugee organization boss in
Izmir, which
is -- used to be the main
smuggling zone.
And this is a town that was
normally thriving
with smugglers and with Syrians
and other
refugees coming to try to get a
deal to try
to get across the Aegean. But in
the past
couple of weeks, the Turks have
cracked town,
the smugglers have all gone, and
all of the
would-be asylum seekers are
hiding in forests
along the coast or in safe
houses.
Now, this is a
multibillion-dollar business.
The smugglers aren't going to
take this lying
down. They want to make that
sort of money.
And so they're going to be
looking for other
routes, possibly land routes,
through to Europe.
But I have been talking to other
people, for
example, refugees who are stuck
in Greece.
And one man in particular,
Edriss Bayat, that
we have looked at, we have met
before on the
"NewsHour," he's a former NATO
employee from
Afghanistan, now, he's at the
former Athens
airport, where -- along with
lots of other
refugees.
The one thing that he's been
worried about
more than anything else is
deportation. But,
under this deal, he's not going
to be deported,
but he, along with about 50,000
other people
who are currently stranded in
Greece, nobody's
really certain what is going to
happen to
them.
And Greece could become a
detention camp for
these people, although Europe is
saying, for
example, that some of these
people will be
shared around other European
countries. But
so far, that is something that
has not happened.
JEFFREY BROWN: Malcolm Brabant
in Copenhagen
and Matthew Karnitschnig in
Brussels, thank
you both very much.
And now to politics.
The rift in the Republican Party
over Donald
Trump shows no signs of mending.
Just today,
former Republican presidential
nominee Mitt
Romney announced on social media
that he will
vote for Senator Ted Cruz in the
Utah caucuses
next Tuesday.
Meanwhile, as Trump marches
closer to the
1,200-plus delegates he needs to
secure the
party's nomination, some party
operatives
are scrambling for an
alternative. On Thursday,
a group of conservative GOP
activists held
a closed-door meeting here in
Washington to
discuss how to block Trump from
the nomination.
Here's Erick Erickson, who was
one of the
meeting's organizers, on FOX
Business News
Thursday:
ERICK ERICKSON, Editor in Chief,
RedState.Com:
The Republicans, if they
nominate Donald Trump,
are going to nominate the only
politician
in America more unpopular and
less trustworthy
than Hillary Clinton. That's not
where you
start when you want to beat
Hillary Clinton.
But that's the reality of that
with him, and
I'm not going to play a part of
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For his part, a
Trump policy
adviser pushed back today with a
warning for
the Republican Party.
Here is what Sam Clovis had to
say on CNN's
"NEW DAY":
SAM CLOVIS, Donald Trump
National Campaign
Co-Chair: I will tell you this.
If the Republican
Party comes into that
convention, and jimmies
with the rules and takes away
the will of
the people, the will of the
Republicans and
the Democrats and independents
who voted for
Mr. Trump, I will take off my
credentials,
I will leave the floor of that
convention,
and I will leave the Republican
Party forever.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that brings
us to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks. That's
syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York Times
columnist
David Brooks.
So, gentlemen, with that gentle
note to end
this week, David, where does the
Republican
contest stand?
DAVID BROOKS: I'm trembling at
the loss of
Sam Clovis from the ranks.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Trump is looking
like the nominee.
I mean, he had this great night.
He -- if
he continues as he has been
going right now
-- and my paper reported -- our
Upshot department
reported he will get the -- what
he needs.
So he's looking like he can get
it.
There are two ways he cannot get
it. One,
maybe if Kasich drops out, there
are some
polls that show if Cruz is one
on one, he
could make some inroads into
Trump. And then
something behind the scenes or
something -- fiddling
with the rules. I, of course,
think they should
do it.
But one of the features of this
year is that
Donald Trump has a monopoly on
audacity and
he's the only one who takes
action. So, what's
interesting to me about the
Republicans right
now is, with the exception of
Florida Governor
Rick Scott and Chris Christie,
they're not
flocking to Trump. They do not
like the guy.
They're terrorized of the guy.
They're repulsed
by the guy.
But they're not flocking to him,
but they're
not doing anything against him
either. They're
just sitting there like a
psychologically
depleted party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, where does
that leave -- so
that, Mark, he just marches on
to Cleveland
and the nomination.
MARK SHIELDS: He does.
What conservative philosopher
and columnist
George Will called the most
gifted and diversified
field of Republican candidates
since 1865
is now down essentially to two,
to Donald
Trump and Ted Cruz, the
quintessential conservative
who cannot be nominated and
cannot win. And
that's where the Republicans
are.
Donald Trump, let it be said in
his behalf,
has won this nomination. I mean,
the people
who are trying to take it away
from him have
won nothing. I mean, John Kasich
has won one
primary, half as many as Marco
Rubio won,
I think, contests.
So, I mean, you know, but he's
won, and he's
won everywhere. I mean, it's
been across the
board. I mean, this is a -- it's
been an open
assault upon the establishment,
and he has
captured it.
So, I just think that, you know,
Lindsey Graham,
a man occasionally known for
spreading the
ugly truth, said it's -- a
choice between
Cruz and Trump is the choice
between being
poisoned and being shot. And I
think that's
where sort of the paralysis that
David...
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: And he chose
poison.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then he went
on to choose
Cruz.
MARK SHIELDS: He did. He chose
arsenic over
-- yes.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But if Trump has
won it, then,
David, is there any sign of
Republican -- I
know you said he's not getting
the big endorsements,
but is it that Republicans are
not listening
to the voters? What's the
disconnect here?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, first of all, in the big
Tuesday states,
40 percent of voters in most of
the states
said, if Trump were the nominee,
they'd consider
a third party. And so that's
some serious
disaffection. You do not see
that. Usually,
people are rallying around at
this point.
And, secondly, there are a lot
of Republicans,
including myself, who find him
morally repulsive.
And he's just not -- there are
some things
more important things than
winning an election.
And supporting a guy who tears
at the social
fabric, who insults the office
of the presidency
by completely unprepared for it,
who plays
on bigotry and fear, who is the
sort of demagogue
our founders feared would upset
the American
experiment in self-government,
well, that
kind of guy, you just can't
support, even
if it means a defeat.
And I think a lot of Republicans
feel that
way, which is why you get those
40 percent
numbers of defectors.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Mark, are
the two of you
saying that literally there is
no -- I know
David said, if something
happened and...
MARK SHIELDS: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, I mean, are
you saying
the odds are just very much
against any...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Oh, no, I think
the momentum
is with him. I think the numbers
are with
him, Judy.
Judy, probably it hasn't been
totaled up yet,
but a good bet is there was $20
million spent
against Donald Trump in Florida,
$20 million
in negative campaign ads that
went from calling
him -- one group, secretive
group associated
with the Koch brothers called
him a wealthy
draft dodger.
They have never mentioned --
they never used
that term about Dick Cheney, but
then they
called Trump University a scam
and accused
him of being just a scurrilous,
unprincipled
person. And all this, and it
apparently -- you
know, if anything, it didn't lay
a glove on
him, and, if anything, increased
his numbers.
I mean, he has a constituency
that is indifferent
to such charges. So, I don't
know what would
be revealed. I mean, there has
been enough
already revealed about him and
understood
that would kill any other
candidate.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, with that
and with the
talk about a whether you call it
a contested
convention or an open
convention, is there
a scenario under which the
people who voted
for Donald Trump or his
delegates would go
along with some other plan, some
other result
at a convention?
DAVID BROOKS: It's hard to
imagine, unless
there was something -- again,
he's like Rasputin.
As Mark said, he just doesn't go
away. He
doesn't die.
Unless somehow something came up
that we don't
know about that -- where they
lost faith,
where they lost heart. But at
this point,
it's hard to see it. He looks
very much like
the nominee. And, as Mark said,
we have treated
this -- everyone says, oh, what
a crazy year.
It's so unexpected. He's been
ahead for eight
months.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sure.
DAVID BROOKS: And only it's
because of the
ignorance of people like me, who
didn't see
that he's ahead for eight
months, so it's
a very simple storyline. He's
been ahead for
eight months. He's still ahead.
And so that's been very stable.
We all expected
him to explode. The only
surprise is, this
has been so linear for him.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. No, there is
always the
blockbuster, the screenplay that
reveals something
about him, that he's got eight
secret families
or something of the sort.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Somebody steps
out from behind
a curtain.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes. No, but I
just think everything
is headed in his direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's turn
to the Democrats.
Hillary Clinton is way ahead,
David, in terms
of delegates, but Bernie Sanders
-- and Bernie
Sanders didn't win any primaries
this week,
but he's campaigning hard and he
says he's
going all the way to
Philadelphia, to the
Democratic Convention.
What is that -- I mean, what do
we have here
on the Democratic side?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think the
Democratic
side is even more ironed shut
down than the
Republican side.
I think she's on a march. And
she got has
nearly twice the number of
delegates he has
got. And she's just been very
solid in her
demographics. Now, she's
amazingly weak outside
of her demographics. Among young
people, he's
getting like 80 percent in some
states. It's
amazing.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right. Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And among
minorities, she's
very solid. Among middle class,
among moderate
Democratic voters, she's very
solid and she's
holding her people.
And I think that is what is
frustrating for
Sanders. She's a fox, and he's a
hedgehog.
She knows a lot of things. He
knows one thing
and he keeps repeating it and
repeating it.
He doesn't adjust tactics. He
doesn't shift.
He's just doing that thing.
And so that thing wins over a
certain demographic,
young people and the left, but
there just
aren't enough of those people to
knock her
off. And so I think she's
looking -- she's
sitting very pretty now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You see any way
he could pull
this off?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, again, when
you have two
candidates in a race, yes, there
is always
a possibility. I recall rather
vividly eight
years ago, when she was asked if
she was going
to get out, and she said, no,
anything can
happen in a race when there is
two people.
Bernie Sanders has run an
absolutely exceptional
campaign, and continues to do.
He has dominated
-- as Donald Trump has dominated
the dialogue
and the debate on the Republican
side and
gotten the attention, he has
totally dominated
the debate on the Democratic
side. He has
moved her on trade, on the TPP.
He has moved her on preserving
Social Security.
She's now pledged to not
touching a single
hair on the gray hair on the
beautiful head
of Social Security. That had
been a traditional
Democratic sort of moderate
position, or new
Democrats, that you had to limit
entitlements.
So, I mean, Bernie, he is -- he
has really
been the driving force in this
campaign. David's
right; 80 percent of voters
under the age
of 30 supported him in several
states. And
he came back. You know, I was
thinking of
Massachusetts, where, in 2008,
Barack Obama
had the support of Governor
Deval Patrick
and Ted Kennedy, and he still
lost by 15 points
to Hillary Clinton.
He almost beat her there. And
he's won a number
of states. And what lies ahead,
he's quite
confident. So I just -- he has
four million
individual contributions. So,
he's given the
party a lot of energy. I don't
think he's
got dreams that he's going to be
the nominee
at this point, but I think he's
got -- he's
leading a cause.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama's
nominee to
the Supreme Court to take the
spot that Justice
Scalia, the late Justice Scalia
had, David,
Merrick Garland, what do make of
the choice,
and what does it say about what
the president
wants on the court?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, frankly, I
think it's
an excellent choice. He's a guy
with apparently
an amazing temperament. He is
the model of
judicial restraint.
He seems to be a man of both
amazing integrity
and capacity to be emotionally
moved. And
so everything I hear about him
is superlative.
And, if I'm a Republican,
frankly, running
the Senate, I'm thinking, this
is the best
I'm going to get. And if Donald
Trump is down
15 points in the summer or fall,
I would confirm
this guy, because Hillary
Clinton, if she
gets elected, who knows what the
Senate will
look like. It will be, from a
Republican point
of view, a lot worse.
So I think Republicans should
say, OK, we
will take this guy, because he's
-- from their
point of view, he's a model of
restraint.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I agree and echo
what David
has said about Judge Garland.
And, Judy, the knocks on him
from the liberal
side is, A, he's a white male.
And, you know,
you have to have somebody who's,
I don't know
what, biracial or something
else.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But he's too much
of a centrist.
MARK SHIELDS: That he -- and
he's 63 years
old, which doesn't seem old at
all to me.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: But -- no, but the
irony here
is, I think the Republicans have
put themselves
in a terrible position. I really
do.
I mean, before the body was cold
of Judge
Scalia, before his family had
been told, Mitch
McConnell tried to head off a
charge from
the conservative insurgents
against the establishment
that they weren't sufficiently
conservative
enough, so they are going to
earn that.
And they have taken a position
basically that
comes down to this. Barack Obama
is the only
president since World War II
other than Dwight
Eisenhower to twice win 51
percent of the
popular vote. And what they want
to say is,
he's got a three-year term for
his second
term.
So, by that logic, that logic,
the people
should decide. The 24 Republican
senators
who are up for reelection this
year shouldn't
vote on anything between now and
November,
until the people have spoken. I
mean, so I
just really think they have
taken a terrible
political position, and I think
it's increasingly
unpopular and eventually
unsustainable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, their
defense -- in their
defense, the Republicans, David,
are saying,
well, but this is to replace
Antonin Scalia,
who was standard-bearer,
conservative for,
what, 25 years on the court.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, but I agree
with Mark philosophically.
You are elected for four years
and you get
to nominate for four years.
Some people -- Justice Marshall
in the old
days, under John Adams, I think
it was, was
nominated in a lame-duck
section.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
DAVID BROOKS: And so that's the
constitutional
historical precedent. So,
philosophically,
I think Mark is right.
Politically, I can't imagine
Republicans will
pay a price for it. I do not
think there are
a lot of voters out there
thinking, oh, you
have got to give this guy a
hearing. I just
don't think it's a voting issue.
So I do not
think Republicans will be
compelled to fold
on this one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does it matter
for the court
that it sits with eight members
until whenever?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, of course.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: A closed mind is a
terrible
thing to tamper with.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: No, I mean, I
think it will
-- it puts people like Kelly
Ayotte in New
Hampshire on the defensive. It
puts Rob Portman
on the defensive. Already, Mark
Kirk has changed.
I just think that states like
that -- I mean,
Chuck Grassley is looking like a
tower of
Jell-O at this point.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: On that note,
Mark Shields,
David Brooks, thank you both.
A movie thriller being released
nationally
today delves into the practical,
legal and
moral issues surrounding drone
warfare.
Jeffrey Brown is back with that.
ACTOR: What's the plan, Captain?
HELEN MIRREN, Actress: We need
to put a Hellfire
through that roof right now.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a new kind
of warfare,
advanced technology that tracks,
identifies,
and has the power to destroy
enemies by remote
control from thousands of miles
away.
HELEN MIRREN: We have two
suicide vests with
explosives inside that house.
JEFFREY BROWN: But as the film
"Eye in the
Sky" asks, should it be used? If
so, when,
especially if innocent lives may
also be taken?
HELEN MIRREN: Harold, this is a
very time-sensitive
target. Do I have authority to
strike?
ACTOR: The rules of engagement
you're operating
under only allow for a low
collateral damage
estimate.
ACTRESS: Yes. Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: The film follows
British military
commanders, including Helen
Mirren as Colonel
Katherine Powell, as they debate
with Cabinet
officers and politicians over a
strike against
Al-Shabaab terrorists in
Nairobi, Kenya, who
appear to be on the verge of a
suicide bombing.
ACTOR: I told you, they came to
witness a
capture, not a kill. Give me a
capture option.
HELEN MIRREN: We no longer have
a capture
option. Any action on the ground
will lead
to an armed confrontation, which
we will not
be able to contain.
JEFFREY BROWN: Director Gavin
Hood, who joined
us recently at the E Street
Cinema in Washington,
has the action play out in real
time.
GAVIN HOOD, Director, "Eye in
the Sky": We
wanted to immerse the audience
in a real operation.
And we wanted the audience to
feel as if they
were participating in that
operation.
It's a very strange world that
we're moving
into, this world of drone
warfare, automated
warfare, where our soldiers,
we're trying
to take them off the battlefield
in order
to minimize our casualties. And
yet the battlefield
is still a very real place for
those we target.
And so the questions of when to
target, who
to target, what might the
fallout, blowback
are not theoretical or
touchy-feely. They
matter.
JEFFREY BROWN: The film presents
a dramatic
complication. A young girl who
lives nearby
sets up her bread stand just
outside the targeted
house. American drone pilot
Steve Watts played
by Aaron Paul sits far away in a
trailer in
Nevada and hesitates before
launching his
missile.
AARON PAUL, Actor: Ma'am, I need
you to run
the collateral damage estimate
again with
this girl out front.
HELEN MIRREN: The situation has
not changed,
Lieutenant. You are cleared to
engage.
GAVIN HOOD: If we're going to
confront this
question, let's take it to the
wire. I'm not
going to let you off the hook.
If the question
is, will you take an innocent
life in order
to save potentially more lives,
let's really
go to that place.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Obama
administration has
embraced the use of drones as an
effective
anti-terror weapon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Somalia, the
Islamist group
Al-Shabaab confirms the U.S.
bombed one of
its camps on Saturday.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just this month,
the Pentagon,
citing self-defense and the
defense of African
allies, said it used drones and
other aircraft
to hit an Al-Shabaab training
camp in Somalia,
killing about 150 fighters.
Pentagon officials said they
didn't believe
there were any civilian
casualties, but the
claim could not be independently
verified.
We asked two drone warfare
experts from opposing
sides to watch the film and
discuss it with
us.
Naureen Shah heads the security
and human
rights program of Amnesty
International USA.
Matt Olsen has been in
situations like those
in the film as former director
of the National
Counterterrorism Center in the
Obama administration.
There were two thumbs-up for the
film as a
tense, mostly realistic
thriller, but continuing
disagreement on the use of
drones.
NAUREEN SHAH, Amnesty
International USA: What
the film shows is the best-case
scenario,
potentially, for the government,
where we
know who is inside a house
that's being targeted.
But in the cases that Amnesty
International
has documented, we would have
real questions
about whether the U.S.
government had the
advantage of the kind of
facial-recognition
technology that appears to be in
the film,
the eyes on the ground, the
ability to try
to get an individual who might
be killed,
to get her away from the target
strike area.
And that's part of the problem,
actually,
is that there are -- there's a
novel technology
out there, and we as a public
are swayed by
that technology to think, well,
this is going
to be a precise killing, this is
going to
be a clean kind of warfare, a
kind of warfare
that can be taken into cities,
like we're
seeing here in Nairobi, and as
though that
excuses it from the kinds of
laws and kind
of rules that we would
ordinarily apply to
any kind of use of lethal force.
JEFFREY BROWN: Shrouded in
secrecy by necessity
or -- I mean, what's the
response to that?
MATTHEW OLSEN, Former Director,
National Counterterrorism
Center: The principal response
is that the
president and the administration
has been
quite open about the standards
that apply
to this type of lethal force.
Again, no strike can take place,
as the president
has said, unless several
specific criteria
are met, first, that it's
lawful, consistent
with the laws of war, consistent
with U.S.
domestic law, that there is a
basis to believe
that the targets present an
imminent threat
to the lives of Americans, and
that capture
is not possible, and then, last,
that no strike
can take place unless there's
near certainty
that no innocent person will be
harmed.
As the president has
acknowledged, innocent
people have been killed in this
war, as in
any war. But those standards are
above and
beyond what would be legally
required under
the laws of war.
NAUREEN SHAH: We have never seen
the U.S.
government acknowledge the
killing of a Yemeni
or a Pakistani or Somali
civilian, innocent
life.
There is zero acknowledgement of
specific
individuals. And so if we're to
say that it's
OK to kill people outside who
are selling
bread in Nairobi, Kenya, we're
also saying
it's OK to kill us right here in
Washington,
D.C., if there's people in a
neighboring building
who potentially pose some kind
of threat.
MATTHEW OLSEN: I think that's
quite exaggerated,
the idea that we would be at
risk here in
Washington, D.C.
The president has been very
clear where the
types of strikes that have been
approved,
outside of areas of hostile
battlefields,
outside of areas of active
hostility, those
have been approved under very
circumscribed
circumstances, where, again,
we're at war
with al-Qaida and associated
forces.
JEFFREY BROWN: In "Eye in the
Sky," we see
tiny camera drones, some already
on the market,
says director Gavin Hood, others
close behind.
And soon, he adds, they will do
more than
just capture high-definition
images.
GAVIN HOOD: Instead of putting a
Hellfire
missile through the roof of a
house in which
the terrorists are holed up, the
tiny drone
flies through the window or a
door, and detonates
right by your temple, or it
blows a little
dose of anthrax in your nose as
it flies by.
It's very creepy, but there's no
stopping
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Such
technological advances
will no doubt only raise new
challenges and
debates.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a "NewsHour"
Essay.
This month, many high school
seniors have
either just learned, or are
anxiously waiting
to hear, what colleges they
might have gotten
into.
Education advocate Keith Frome
has worked
with students across the
country, and believes
the key to getting more kids to
apply to college
is peer pressure.
KEITH FROME, Author, "How's My
Kid Doing?":
One summer weekend, I taught a
small group
of students from a low-income
community how
to write their personal
statements for their
college applications.
Each student would be the first
in their family
to apply to college, and their
ability to
tell their stories was going to
be critical
to their success.
During the three-day retreat, we
used a variety
of writing techniques to produce
memorable,
compelling and utterly authentic
essays that
I knew would stick in the minds
of college
admission officers.
Returning home, I felt quite
satisfied, perhaps
a little smugly so, with a job
well done,
and I proudly shared the
compositions with
my friends and family.
One of the students, though, who
wrote about
his attempts to extricate
himself from a neighborhood
gang, didn't share my sense of
completion.
Though he had completed his
college applications,
his work was just beginning. He
was on a mission.
When he returned to school, he
asked his principal
to gather the entire senior
class in the auditorium.
He proceeded to read his
personal statement
to them and said that, if he
could write this
well, everyone else could do the
same.
He then led every senior, step
by step, through
the composition of their
personal statements
using the techniques he had
learned in our
weekend together.
They started with a free-write.
They read
these aloud. They listened to
each other,
noting moments of beauty and
probing for more
details and explanations.
The principal called me later
that week, astonished
at what he had witnessed. My
colleagues and
I began to hear similar stories
from other
schools around the country. We
began to understand
that the most influential person
to a 17-year-old
is another 17-year-old.
And it struck us that this might
be a key
to solving a big problem. Every
year, there
are 1.1 million low-income
eighth graders
in America's schools; 95 percent
say they
want to go to college, but only
9 percent
of them will graduate by the
time they are
24. In 1970, that figure was 6
percent. We
have clearly not made much
progress.
Many think that the solution is
to bring complex
and expensive interventions into
schools.
I say the students themselves,
with some training
and coaching, can be organized
into teams
to work on behalf of the rest of
their classmates.
STUDENT: The only thing about
your personal
essay is, like, it's really
good. So, I would
say type it up just as it is,
right?
KEITH FROME: There are hundreds
of urban or
rural high schools around the
country where
I am privileged to watch
students leading
their classmates to college.
I have seen students lock their
fellow seniors
in a gym until they have
completed their college
applications. When college
representatives
refused to come to a high
school, I saw a
group of students themselves
represent the
colleges for the rest of the
school in the
cafeteria.
In rural Florida, I watched a
team of juniors
and seniors lead an assembly for
1,500 students
like it was a revival meeting,
exhorting the
entire school to commit to going
to college.
Peer leadership is a powerful
force to behold,
and it gets measurable results.
In high schools, where peer
leader teams are
deployed, we have seen students
get more than
70 percent of their classmates
to apply to
college, resulting in increases
of 20 percent
or more in actual college
enrollment rates.
We are entering an era in
education reform
that is calling for more
collaboration among
schools, unions and businesses,
so that all
students succeed. That sounds
good, but we
will only witness more
lackluster results
unless we understand that
students are partners,
too, who can help their peers
achieve.
I'm reminded of a high school
senior named
Cornelius Williams, who had no
intention of
going to college. He had no
adult role models
who ever attended college and he
didn't see
the value in it. One day, he met
Ashley Daniels
who had just been trained to be
a peer leader.
She nurtured and nagged
Cornelius through
the entire application process.
Not only did he get into
college. After he
graduated, he volunteered with
College Summit,
paying Ashley's coaching forward
to a new
generation of students.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will be back
in just a moment.
But, first, take this time to
hear from your
local PBS station. It's a chance
to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now for our
"NewsHour"
Shares, something that caught
our eye that
we thought might be
of interest to you too.
a pair of bald eagles nesting at
the National
Arboretum in Washington, D.C. A
Web camera
captured the first of possibly
two eaglets
fully emerging from its egg this
morning.
Biologists say the baby bald
eagle known for
now as DC2 appears to be doing
well and is
already being fed. The second
egg, which was
laid a few days after its
sibling, could hatch
over the weekend. The two adult
bald eagles
are the first pair to nest at
the National
Arboretum since 1947. They
successfully raised
their first eaglet last summer.
What can you say but aww?
On the "NewsHour" online: what a
Trump presidency
would mean for America's role in
the world.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner talked to U.S. diplomats
and foreign
correspondents to get their
unique take on
the 2016 race.
You can read about
that on
our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And later this evening on
"Washington Week,"
Gwen Ifill and her panelists
will have more
analysis and insight into the
week's big news.
Here's a preview.
GWEN IFILL: What's not to like
about Merrick
Garland? Senate Republicans say
it's not personal,
but still they will not confirm
this president's
Supreme Court nominee. Plus, why
do John Kasich,
Ted Cruz and Bernie Sanders
think they still
have a chance? We explain the
delegate math
for both Democrats and
Republicans, and what
it means for the nominating
conventions, or
we will try to.
That's later tonight on
"Washington Week"
-- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On "PBS NewsHour
Weekend" Saturday,
from South Africa, a look at
efforts by the
government to regulate the
practice of traditional
healing.
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
a report on President Obama's
historic trip
to Havana, what it means for
Cuba and the
U.S.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.